Planning systems often make the assumption that omniscient world knowledge is available. Our approach makes the more realistic assumption that the initial knowledge about the actions is incomplete, and uses experimentation as a learning mechanism when the missing knowledge causes an execution failure. Previous work on learning by experimentation has not addressed the issue of how to choose good experiments, and much research on learning from failure has relied on background knowledge to build explanations that pinpoint directly the causes of failures. We want to investigate the potential of a system for efficient learning by experimentation without such background knowledge. This paper describes domain-independent heuristics that compare possible hypotheses and choose the ones most likely to cause the failure. These heuristics extract information solely from the domain operators initially available for planning (incapable of producing such explanations) and the planner's experiences in interacting with the environment. Our approach has been implemented in EXPO, a system that uses PRODIGY as a baseline planner and improves its domain knowledge in several domains. The empirical results presented show that EXPO's heuristics dramatically reduce the number of experiments needed to refine incomplete operators. 
 In order for autonomous systems to interact with their environment in an intelligent way, they must be given the ability to adapt and learn incrementally and deliberately. It is virtually impossible to devise and hand code all potentially relevant domain knowledge for complex dynamic tasks. This thesis describes a framework to acquire domain knowledge for planning by failure-driven experimentation with the environment. The initial domain knowledge in the system is an approximate model for planning in the environment, defining the system's expectations. The framework exploits the characteristics of planning domains in order to search the space of plausible hypotheses without the need for additional background knowledge to build causal explanations for expectation failures. Plans are executed while the external environment is monitored, and differences between the internal state and external observations are detected by various methods each correlated with a typical cause for the expectation failure. The methods also construct a set of concrete hypotheses to repair the knowledge deficit. After being heuristically filtered, each hypothesis is tested in turn with an experiment. After the experiment is designed, a plan is constructed to achieve the situation required to carry out the experiment. The experiment plan must meet constraints such as minimizing plan length and negative interference with the main goals. The thesis describes a set of domain-independent constraints for experiments and their incorporation in the planning search space. After the execution of the plan and the experiment, observations are collected to conclude if the experiment was successful or not. Upon success, the hypothesis is confirmed and the domain knowledge is adjusted. Upon failure, the experimentation process is iterated on the remaining hypotheses until success or until no more hypotheses are left to be considered. This framework has shown to be an effective way to address incomplete planning knowledge and is demonstrated in a system called EXPO, implemented on the PRODIGY planning architecture. The effectiveness and efficiency of EXPO's methods is empirically demonstrated in several domains, including a large-scale process planning task, where the planner can recover from situations missing up to 50% of domain knowledge through repeated experimentation.


